Everyday we hear sounds from various
sources like humans, bir ds, bells, machines,
vehicles, televisions, radios etc. Sound is a
form of ener gy which pr oduces a sensation
of hearing in our ears. Ther e are also other
forms of energy like mechanical energy, light
energy, etc. W e have talked about mechanical
energy in the pr evious chapters. Y ou have
been taught about conservation of energy,
which states that we can neither create nor
destr oy ener gy. W e  can just change it fr om
one for m to another . When you clap, a sound
is produced. Can you produce sound without
utilising your energy? Which form of energy
did you use to produce sound? In this
chapter we are going to learn how sound is
produced and how it is transmitted through
a medium and received by our ears.
11.1 Production of Sound
Activity _____________ 11.1
•Take a tuning fork and set it vibrating
by striking its pr ong on a rubber pad.
Bring it near your ear .
•Do you hear any sound?
•Touch one of the pr ongs of the vibrating
tuning fork with your finger and shar e
your experience with your friends.
•Now, suspend a table tennis ball or a
small plastic ball by a thr ead fr om a
support [T ake a big needle and a
thread, put a knot at one end of the
thread, and then with the help of the
needle pass the thr ead thr ough the
ball]. T ouch the ball gently with the
prong of a vibrating tuning
fork (Fig. 11.1).
•Observe what happens and discuss
with your friends.Activity _____________ 11.2
•Fill water in a beaker or a glass up to
the brim. Gently touch the water sur face
with one of the pr ongs of the vibrating
tuning fork, as shown in Fig. 1 1.2.
•Next dip the pr ongs of the vibrating
tuning fork in water , as shown in Fig.
11.3.
•Observe what happens in both the
cases.
•Discuss with your friends why this
happens.Fig. 11.1:  Vibrating tuning fork just touching the
suspended table tennis ball.
Fig. 11.2:   One of the prongs of the vibrating tuning
fork touching the water sur face.11
SSS
SSOUND OUNDOUND OUNDOUNDChapter
Rationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE 128the vibrating object to the ear . A particle of
the medium in contact with the vibrating
object is first displaced fr om its equilibrium
position. It then exerts a for ce on the adjacent
particle. As a r esult of which the adjacent
particle gets displaced fr om its position of
rest. After displacing the adjacent particle the
first particle comes back to its original
position. This pr ocess continues in the
medium till the sound r eaches your ear . The
disturbance created by a source of  sound in
the medium travels through the medium and
not the particles of the medium.
A wave is a disturbance that moves
through a medium when the particles of the
medium set neighbouring particles into
motion. They in tur n produce similar motion
in others. The particles of the medium do not
move forwar d themselves, but the
disturbance is carried forwar d. This is what
happens during pr opagation of sound in a
medium, hence sound can be visualised as a
wave. Sound waves are characterised by the
motion of particles in the medium and ar e
called mechanical waves.
Air is the most common medium thr ough
which sound travels. When a vibrating object
moves forward, it pushes and compresses the
air in front of it creating a region of high
pressur e. This r egion is called a compr ession
(C), as shown in Fig. 11.4. This compression
starts to move away from the vibrating object.
When the vibrating object moves backwar ds,
it creates a r egion of low pr essur e called
rarefaction (R), as shown in Fig. 11.4. As the
object moves back and forth rapidly, a series
of compressions and rarefactions is created in
the air . These make the sound wave thatFig. 11.3: Both the prongs of the vibrating tuning
fork dipped in water
From the above activities what do you
conclude? Can you pr oduce sound without
a vibrating object?
In the above activities we have pr oduced
sound by striking the tuning fork. W e can
also pr oduce sound by plucking, scratching,
rubbing, blowing or shaking dif ferent objects.
As per the above activities what do we do to
the objects? W e set the objects vibrating and
produce sound. V ibration means a kind of
rapid to and fr o motion of an object. The
sound of the human voice is pr oduced due
to vibrations in the vocal cor ds. When a bir d
flaps its wings, do you hear any sound? Think
how the buzzing sound accompanying a bee
is produced. A str etched rubber band when
plucked vibrates and produces sound. If you
have never done this, then do it and observe
the vibration of the str etched rubber band.
Activity _____________ 11.3
•Make a list of different types of
musical instruments and discuss
with your friends which part of the
instrument vibrates to produce
sound.
11.2Propagation of Sound
Sound is pr oduced by vibrating objects. The
matter or substance thr ough which sound
is transmitted is called a medium. It can be
solid, liquid or gas. Sound moves thr ough a
medium from the point of generation to the
listener . When an object vibrates, it sets the
particles of the medium ar ound it vibrating.
The particles do not travel all the way fromFig. 11.4: A vibrating object creating a series of
compr essions (C) and rar efactions (R) in
the medium.
Rationalised 2023-24
SOUND 129propagates through the medium.
Compr ession is the r egion of high pr essur e
and rar efaction is the r egion of low pr essur e.
Pressur e is related to the number of particles
of a medium in a given volume. Mor e density
of the particles in the medium gives mor e
pressur e and vice versa. Thus, pr opagation
of sound can be visualised as pr opagation of
density variations or pr essur e variations in
the medium.
uestion
1.How does the sound produced by
a vibrating object in a medium
reach your ear?
2.Explain how sound is produced
by your school bell.
3.Why are sound waves called
mechanical waves?
4.Suppose you and your friend are
on the moon. W ill you be able to
hear any sound pr oduced by
your friend?
11.2.1 SOUND  WAVES  ARE LONGITUDINAL
WAVES
Activity _____________ 11.4
•Take a slinky.  Ask your friend to hold
one end. Y ou hold the other end.
Now str etch the slinky as shown in
Fig. 11.5(a). Then give it a sharp push
towards your friend.
•What do you notice? If you move your
hand pushing and pulling the slinky
alternatively, what will you observe?
•If you mark a dot on the slinky, you
will observe that the dot on the slinky
will move back and forth parallel to
the direction of the propagation of the
disturbance.The regions where the coils become closer
are called compressions (C) and the regions
where the coils are further apart are called
rarefactions (R). As we already know, sound
propagates in the medium as a series of
compressions and rarefactions. Now, we can
compare the propagation of disturbance in a
slinky with the sound propagation in the
medium. These waves are called longitudinal
waves. In these waves the individual particles
of the medium move in a direction parallel to
the direction of propagation of the disturbance.
The particles do not move from one place to
another but they simply oscillate back and
forth about their position of rest. This is
exactly how a sound wave propagates, hence
sound waves are longitudinal waves.
There is also another type of wave, called
a transverse wave. In a transverse wave
particles do not oscillate along the direction
of wave propagation but oscillate up and down
about their mean position as the wave travels.
Thus, a transverse wave is the one in which
the individual particles of the medium move
about their mean positions in a direction
perpendicular to the direction of wave
propagation. When we drop a pebble in a
pond, the waves you see on the water surface
is an example of transverse wave. Light is a
transverse wave but for light, the oscillations
are not of the medium particles or their
pressure or density— it is not a mechanical
wave. Y ou will come to know mor e about
transverse waves in higher classes.
11.2.2 CHARACTERISTICS  OF A SOUND
WAVE
We can describe a sound wave by its
•frequency
•amplitude and
•speed.Q
A sound wave in graphic form is shown in
Fig. 11.6(c), which represents how density and
pressure change when the sound wave moves
in the medium. The density as well as the
pressure of the medium at a given time varies
with distance, above and below the average
value of density and pressure. Fig. 11.6(a) and(b)(a)
Fig. 11.5:  Longitudinal wave in a slinky.
Rationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE 130Heinrich Rudolph Hertz
was born on 22 February
1857 in Hamburg,
Germany and educated at
the University of Berlin. He
confirmed J.C. Maxwell’s
electromagnetic theory by
his experiments. He laid the
foundation for future
development of radio, telephone, telegraph
and even television. He also discovered the
photoelectric effect which was later
explained by Albert Einstein. The SI unit of
frequency was named as hertz in his honour .Fig. 11.6(b) represent the density and
pressure variations, respectively, as a sound
wave propagates in the medium.
Compressions are the regions where
particles are crowded together and
represented by the upper portion of the curve
in Fig. 11.6(c). The peak represents the region
of maximum compression. Thus,
compressions are regions where density as
well as pressure is high. Rarefactions are the
regions of low pressure where particles are
spread apart and are represented by the
valley, that is, the lower portion of the curve
in Fig. 11.6(c). A peak is called the crest and a
valley is called the trough of a wave.
The distance between two consecutive
compressions (C) or two consecutive
rarefactions (R) is called the wavelength, as
shown in Fig. 11.6(c), The wavelength is
usually represented by λ (Greek letter
lambda). Its SI unit is metre (m).
H. R. Hertz
Fig. 11.6: Sound propagates as density or pressure variations as shown in (a) and (b), (c) represents
graphically the density and pr essur e variations.Frequency tells us how frequently an
event occurs. Suppose you are beating a
drum. How many times you are beating the
drum in unit time is called the frequency of
your beating the drum. W e know that when
sound is propagated through a medium, the
Rationalised 2023-24
SOUND 131How the brain interprets the frequency
of an emitted sound is called its pitch. The
faster the vibration of the source, the
higher is the frequency and the higher is
the pitch, as shown in Fig. 11.7. Thus, a
high pitch sound corresponds to more
number of compressions and rarefactions
passing a fixed point per unit time.
Objects of different sizes and conditions
vibrate at different frequencies to produce
sounds of different pitch.
The magnitude of the maximum
disturbance in the medium on either side of
the mean value is called the amplitude of the
wave. It is usually represented by the letter A,as shown in Fig. 11.6(c). For sound its unit
will be that of density or pressure.
The loudness or softness of a sound is
determined basically by its amplitude. The
amplitude of the sound wave depends upon
the force with which an object is made to
vibrate. If we strike a table lightly, we hear a
soft sound because we produce a sound wavedensity of the medium oscillates between a
maximum value and a minimum value. The
change in density from the maximum value
to the minimum value, then again to the
maximum value, makes one complete
oscillation. The number of such oscillations
per unit time is the frequency of the sound
wave. If we can count the number of the
compressions or rarefactions that cross us
per unit time, we will get the frequency of
the sound wave. It is usually represented by
ν (Greek letter , nu). Its SI unit is hertz
(symbol, Hz).
The time taken by two consecutive
compressions or rarefactions to cross a fixed
point is called the time period of the wave. In
other words, we can say that the time taken
for one complete oscillation is called the time
period of the sound wave. It is represented by
the symbol T. Its SI unit is second (s).
Frequency and time period are related as
follows:
 A violin and a flute may both be played at
the same time in an orchestra. Both sounds
travel through the same medium, that is, air
and arrive at our ear at the same time. Both
sounds travel at the same speed irrespective
of the source. But the sounds we receive are
different. This is due to the different
characteristics associated with the sound.
Pitch is one of the characteristics.=1vTFig. 11.7:  Low pitch sound has low frequency and
high pitch of sound has high frequency.
Fig. 11.8: Soft sound has small amplitude and
louder sound has large amplitude.
Rationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE 132QQuestions
1.Which wave property determines
(a) loudness, (b) pitch?
2.Guess which sound has a higher
pitch: guitar or car horn?
The speed of sound is defined as the
distance which a point on a wave, such as a
compression or a rarefaction, travels per unit
time.
We know,
speed, v = distance / time
= λ
TExample 11.1 A sound wave has a
frequency of 2 kHz and wave length
35 cm. How long will it take to travel
1.5 km?
Solution:
Given,
Frequency, ν = 2 kHz = 2000 Hz
Wavelength, λ = 35 cm = 0.35 m
We know that speed, v of the wave
= wavelength × frequency
v= λ ν
= 0.35 m  2000 Hz = 700 m/s
The time taken by the wave to travel a
distance, d of 1.5 km is
Thus sound will take 2.1 s to travel a
distance of 1.5 km.
uestions
1.What ar e wavelength, fr equency,
time period and amplitude of a
sound wave?
2.How are the wavelength and
frequency of a sound wave
related to its speed?
3.Calculate the wavelength of a
sound wave whose fr equency is
220 Hz and speed is 440 m/s  in
a given medium.
4.A person is listening to a tone of
500 Hz sitting at a distance of
450 m from the source of the
sound. What is the time interval
between successive compr essions
from the source?
The amount of sound energy passing each
second through unit area is called the intensity
of sound. W e sometimes use the ter ms
“loudness” and “intensity” interchangeably,
but they are not the same. Loudness is a
measure of the response of the ear to the sound.
Even when two sounds are of equal intensity,
we may hear one as louder than the other
simply because our ear detects it better .of less energy (amplitude). If we hit the table
hard we hear a louder sound. Can you tell
why? A sound wave spreads out from its
source. As it moves away from the source its
amplitude as well as its loudness decreases.
Louder sound can travel a larger distance as
it is associated with higher energy. Fig. 11.8
shows the wave shapes of a loud and a soft
sound of the same frequency.
The quality or timber of sound is that
characteristic which enables us to distinguish
one sound from another having the same pitch
and loudness. The sound which is more
pleasant is said to be of a rich quality. A sound
of single frequency is called a tone. The sound
which is produced due to a mixture of several
frequencies is called a note and is pleasant to
listen to. Noise is unpleasant to the ear! Music
is pleasant to hear and is of rich quality.
Here λ is the wavelength of the sound wave. It
is the distance travelled by the sound wave in
one time period ( T) of the wave. Thus,
v = λ ν 
or v = λ ν
That is, speed = wavelength × frequency.
The speed of sound remains almost the
same for all frequencies in a given medium
under the same physical conditions.
Rationalised 2023-24
SOUND 133uestion
1.Distinguish between loudness
and intensity of sound.uestion
1.In which of the thr ee media, air ,
water or iron, does sound travel
the fastest at a particular
temperature?
11.3 Reflection of Sound
Sound bounces off a solid or a liquid like a
rubber ball bounces off a wall. Like light, sound
gets reflected at the surface of a solid or liquid
and follows the same laws of reflection as you
have studied in earlier classes. The directions
in which the sound is incident and is reflected
make equal angles with the normal to the
reflecting surface at the point of incidence, and
the three are in the same plane. An obstacle of
large size which may be polished or rough is
needed for the reflection of sound waves.
Activity _____________ 11.5
•Take two identical pipes, as shown in
Fig. 11.9. Y ou can make the pipes
using chart paper . The length of the
pipes should be sufficiently long
as shown.
•Arrange them on a table near a wall.
•Keep a clock near the open end of one
of the pipes and try to hear the sound
of the clock through the other pipe.
•Adjust the position of the pipes so
that you can best hear the sound of
the clock.
•Now, measure the angles of incidence
and reflection and see the
relationship between the angles.
•Lift the pipe on the right vertically
to a small height and observe
what happens.
(In place of a clock, a mobile phone
on vibrating mode may also be used.)QQ
11.2.3 SPEED OF SOUND  IN DIFFERENT
MEDIA
Sound propagates through a medium at a finite
speed. The sound of a thunder is heard  a little
later than the flash of light is seen. So, we can
make out that sound travels with a speed
which is much less than the speed of light. The
speed of sound depends on the properties of
the medium thr ough which it travels. Y ou will
learn about this dependence in higher classes.
The speed of sound in a medium depends on
temperature of the medium. The speed of
sound decreases when we go from solid to
gaseous state. In any medium as we increase
the temperature, the speed of sound increases.
For example, the speed of sound in air is 331
m s–1 at 0 ºC and 344 m s–1 at 22 ºC. The speeds
of sound at a particular temperature in various
media ar e listed in T able 11.1. Y ou need not
memorise the values.
Table 11.1: Speed of sound in
different media at 25 ºC
State Substance Speed in m/s
Solids Aluminium 6420
Nickel 6040
Steel 5960
Iron 5950
Brass 4700
Glass (Flint) 3980
Liquids Water (Sea) 1531
Water (distilled) 1498
Ethanol 1207
Methanol 1103
Gases Hydrogen 1284
Helium 965
Air 346
Oxygen 316
Sulphur dioxide 213Fig. 11.9:  Reflection of sound
Rationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE 13411.3.1 ECHO
If we shout or clap near a suitable reflecting
object such as a tall building or a
mountain,we will hear the same sound
again a little  later . This sound which we
hear is called an echo. The sensation of
sound persists in our brain for about 0.1
s. To hear a distinct echo the time interval
between the original sound and the
reflected one must be  at least 0.1s. If we
take the speed of sound to be 344 m/s at a
given temperatur e, say at 22 ºC in air , the
sound must go to the obstacle and reach
back the ear of the listener on reflection after
0.1s. Hence, the total distance covered by
the sound from the point of generation to
the reflecting surface and back should be
at least (344 m/s) × 0.1 s = 34.4 m. Thus,
for hearing distinct echoes, the minimum
distance of the obstacle from the source of
sound must be half of this distance, that
is, 17.2 m. This distance will change with
the temperatur e of air . Echoes may be hear d
more than once due to successive or
multiple reflections. The rolling of thunder
is due to the successive reflections of the
sound from a number of reflecting surfaces,
such as the clouds and the land.
11.3.2 REVERBERATION
A sound created in a big hall will persist
by repeated reflection from the walls until
it is reduced to a value where it is no longer
audible. The repeated reflection that
results in this persistence of sound is
called reverberation. In an auditorium or
big hall excessive reverberation is highly
undesirable. To reduce reverberation, the
roof and walls of the auditorium are
generally covered with sound-absorbent
materials like compressed fibreboard,
rough plaster or draperies. The seat
materials are also selected on the basis of
their sound absorbing properties.
Example 11.2  A person clapped his hands
near a cliff and heard the echo after 2 s.What is the distance of the cliff from the
person if the speed of the sound, v is
taken as 346 m s–1?
Solution:
Given,
Speed of sound, v = 346 m s–1
Time taken for hearing the echo,
t = 2 s
Distance travelled by the sound
= v × t = 346 m s–1 × 2 s = 692 m
In 2 s sound has to travel twice the
distance between the cliff and the
person. Hence, the distance between the
cliff and the person
= 692 m/2 = 346 m.
Q
Horn
Megaphone
Fig 11.10:   A megaphone and a horn.uestion
1.An echo is heard in 3 s. What is
the distance of the reflecting
surface from the source, given that
the speed of sound is  342  m s–1?
11.3.3 USES OF MULTIPLE  REFLECTION
OF SOUND
1.Megaphones or loudhailers, horns,
musical instruments such as trumpets
and shehanais , are all designed to send
sound in a particular direction without
spreading it in all directions, as shown
in Fig 11.10.
Rationalised 2023-24
SOUND 1352.Stethoscope is a medical instrument
used for listening to sounds produced
within the body, mainly in the heart or
lungs. In stethoscopes the sound of the
patient’s heartbeat reaches the doctor’s
ears by multiple reflection of sound, as
shown in Fig.11.11.
Fig. 11.12:  Curved ceiling of a conference hall.Fig. 11.13:  Sound board used in a big hall.
uestion
1.Why are the ceilings of concert
halls curved?
11.4Range of Hearing
The audible range of sound for human beings
extends from about 20 Hz to 20000 Hz (one
Hz = one cycle/s). Children under the age of
five and some animals, such as dogs can hear
up to 25 kHz (1 kHz = 1000 Hz). As people
grow older their ears become less sensitive to
higher frequencies. Sounds of frequencies
below 20 Hz are called infrasonic sound or
infrasound. If we could hear infrasound we
would hear the vibrations of a pendulum just
as we hear the vibrations of the wings of a bee.
Rhinoceroses communicate using infrasound
of frequency as low as 5 Hz. Whales and
elephants produce sound in the infrasound
range. It is observed that some animals get
disturbed before earthquakes. Earthquakes
produce low-frequency infrasound before the
main shock waves begin which possibly alert
the animals. Frequencies higher than 20 kHz
are called ultrasonic sound or ultrasound.
Ultrasound is produced by animals such as
dolphins, bats and porpoises. Moths of certain
families have very sensitive hearing equipment.
These moths can hear the high frequencyQ
Fig.11.11:  Stethoscope
3.Generally the ceilings of concert halls,
conference halls and cinema halls are
curved so that sound after reflection
reaches all corners of the hall, as
shown in Fig 1 1.12. Sometimes a
curved soundboard may be placed
behind the stage so that the sound,
after reflecting from the sound board,
spreads evenly across the width of the
hall (Fig 1 1.13).In these instruments, a tube followed
by a conical opening reflects sound
successively to guide most of the
sound waves from the source in the
forward direction towards the
audience.
Rationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE 136squeaks of the bat and know when a bat
is flying nearby, and are able to escape
capture. Rats also play games by
producing ultrasound.
Hearing Aid: People with hearing loss may
need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an
electronic, battery operated device. The
hearing aid receives sound through a
microphone. The microphone converts the
sound waves to electrical signals. These
electrical signals are amplified by an
amplifier . The amplified electrical signals
are given to a speaker of the hearing aid.
The speaker converts the amplified
electrical signal to sound and sends to the
ear for clear hearing.in construction of big structures like
buildings, bridges, machines and also
scientific equipment. The cracks or
holes inside the metal blocks, which
are invisible from outside reduces the
strength of the structure. Ultrasonic
waves are allowed to pass through the
metal block and detectors are used to
detect the transmitted waves. If there
is even a small defect, the ultrasound
gets reflected back indicating the
presence of the flaw or defect, as shown
in Fig. 11.14.
Q
Metallic components are generally useduestions
1.What is the audible range of the
average human ear?
2.What is the range of frequencies
associated with
(a)Infrasound?
(b)Ultrasound?
11.5Applications of Ultrasound
Ultrasounds are high frequency waves.
Ultrasounds are able to travel along well-
defined paths even in the presence of
obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively
in industries and for medical purposes.
•Ultrasound is generally used to clean
parts located in hard-to-reach places,
for example, spiral tube, odd shaped
parts, electronic components, etc.
Objects to be cleaned are placed in a
cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves
are sent into the solution. Due to
the high frequency, the particles of
dust, grease and dirt get detached and
drop out. The objects thus get
thoroughly cleaned.
•Ultrasounds can be used to detect
cracks and flaws in metal blocks.Fig 11.14:  Ultrasound is reflected back from the
defective locations inside a metal block.
Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths
cannot be used for such purpose as it will
bend around the corners of the defective
location and enter the detector .
•Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect
from various parts of the heart and
form the image of the heart. This  tech-
nique is called ‘echocardiography’.
•Ultrasound scanner is an instrument
which uses ultrasonic waves for
getting images of internal organs of the
human body. A doctor may image the
patient’s or gans, such as the liver , gall
bladder , uterus, kidney, etc. It helps
the doctor to detect abnormalities,
such as stones in the gall bladder and
kidney or tumours in different organs.
In this technique the ultrasonic waves
travel through the tissues of the body
and get reflected from a region where
there is a change of tissue density.
Rationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE 136squeaks of the bat and know when a bat
is flying nearby, and are able to escape
capture. Rats also play games by
producing ultrasound.
Hearing Aid:  People with hearing loss may
need a hearing aid. A hearing aid is an
electronic, battery operated device. The
hearing aid receives sound through a
microphone. The microphone converts the
sound waves to electrical signals. These
electrical signals are amplified by an
amplifier . The amplified electrical signals
are given to a speaker of the hearing aid.
The speaker converts the amplified
electrical signal to sound and sends to the
ear for clear hearing.in construction of big structures like
buildings, bridges, machines and also
scientific equipment. The cracks or
holes inside the metal blocks, which
are invisible from outside reduces the
strength of the structure. Ultrasonic
waves are allowed to pass through the
metal block and detectors are used to
detect the transmitted waves. If there
is even a small defect, the ultrasound
gets reflected back indicating the
presence of the flaw or defect, as shown
in Fig. 11.14.
Q
Metallic components are generally useduestions
1.What is the audible range of the
average human ear?
2.What is the range of frequencies
associated with
(a)Infrasound?
(b)Ultrasound?
11.5Applications of Ultrasound
Ultrasounds are high frequency waves.
Ultrasounds are able to travel along well-
defined paths even in the presence of
obstacles. Ultrasounds are used extensively
in industries and for medical purposes.
•Ultrasound is generally used to clean
parts located in hard-to-reach places,
for example, spiral tube, odd shaped
parts, electronic components, etc.
Objects to be cleaned are placed in a
cleaning solution and ultrasonic waves
are sent into the solution. Due to
the high frequency, the particles of
dust, grease and dirt get detached and
drop out. The objects thus get
thoroughly cleaned.
•Ultrasounds can be used to detect
cracks and flaws in metal blocks.Fig 11.14:  Ultrasound is reflected back from the
defective locations inside a metal block.
Ordinary sound of longer wavelengths
cannot be used for such purpose as it will
bend around the corners of the defective
location and enter the detector .
•Ultrasonic waves are made to reflect
from various parts of the heart and
form the image of the heart. This  tech-
nique is called ‘echocardiography’.
•Ultrasound scanner is an instrument
which uses ultrasonic waves for
getting images of internal organs of the
human body. A doctor may image the
patient’s or gans, such as the liver , gall
bladder , uterus, kidney, etc. It helps
the doctor to detect abnormalities,
such as stones in the gall bladder and
kidney or tumours in different organs.
In this technique the ultrasonic waves
travel through the tissues of the body
and get reflected from a region where
there is a change of tissue density.
Rationalised 2023-24
SOUND 137What
you have
learnt
• Sound is produced due to vibration of different objects.
• Sound travels as a longitudinal wave through a material
medium.
• Sound travels as successive compressions and rarefactions
in the medium.
• In sound propagation, it is the energy of the sound that
travels and not the particles of the medium.
• The change in density from one maximum value to the
minimum value and again to the maximum value makes
one complete oscillation.
• The distance between two consecutive compressions or two
consecutive rarefactions is called the wavelength, λ.
• The time taken by the wave for one complete oscillation of
the density or pressure of the medium is called the time
period, T.
• The number of complete oscillations per unit time is called
the frequency (ν ), 1=v.T
• The speed v, frequency ν, and wavelength λ, of sound are
related by the equation, v  = λν.
• The speed of sound depends primarily on the nature and
the temperature of the transmitting medium.
• The law of reflection of sound states that the directions in
which the sound is incident and reflected make equal angles
with the normal to the reflecting surface at the point of
incidence and the three lie in the same plane.
• For hearing a distinct sound, the time interval between the
original sound and the reflected one must be at least 0.1 s.
• The persistence of sound in an auditorium is the result of
repeated reflections of sound and is called reverberation.These waves are then converted into
electrical signals that are used to
generate images of the organ. These
images are then displayed on a monitor
or printed on a film. This technique
is called ‘ultrasonography’.
Ultrasonography is also used forexamination of the foetus during
pregnancy to detect congenial defects
and growth abnormalities.
•Ultrasound may be employed to break
small ‘stones’ formed in the kidneys
into fine grains. These grains later get
flushed out with urine.
Rationalised 2023-24
SCIENCE 138• Loudness is a physiological response of the ear to the intensity
of sound.
• The amount of sound energy passing each second through
unit area is called the intensity of sound.
• The audible range of hearing for average human beings is in
the frequency range of 20 Hz – 20 kHz.
• Sound waves with frequencies below the audible range are
termed “infrasonic” and those above the audible range are
termed “ultrasonic”.
• Ultrasound has many medical and industrial applications.
Exercises
1.What is sound and how is it produced?
2.Describe with the help of a diagram, how compressions and
rarefactions are produced in air near a source of sound.
3.Why is sound wave called a longitudinal wave?
4.Which characteristic of the sound helps you to identify your
friend by his voice while sitting with others in a dark room?
5.Flash and thunder are produced simultaneously. But
thunder is heard a few seconds after the flash is seen, why?
6.A person has a hearing range from 20 Hz to 20 kHz. What
are the typical wavelengths of sound waves in air
corresponding to these two frequencies? Take the speed of
sound in air as 344 m s–1.
7.Two children are at opposite ends of an aluminium rod. One
strikes the end of the rod with a stone. Find the ratio of
times taken by the sound wave in air and in aluminium to
reach the second child.
8.The frequency of a source of sound is 100 Hz. How many
times does it vibrate in a minute?
9.Does sound follow the same laws of reflection as light does?
Explain.
10. When a sound is reflected from a distant object, an echo is
produced. Let the distance between the reflecting surface
and the source of sound production remains the same. Do
you hear echo sound on a hotter day?
11. Give two practical applications of reflection of sound waves.
12. A stone is dropped from the top of a tower 500 m high into a
pond of water at the base of the tower . When is the splash
heard at the top? Given, g = 10 m s–2 and speed of sound  =
340 m s–1.• Sound properties such as pitch, loudness and quality are
determined by the corresponding wave properties.
Rationalised 2023-24
SOUND 13913. A sound wave travels at a speed of 339 m s–1. If its wavelength
is 1.5 cm, what is the frequency of the wave? Will it be
audible?
14. What is reverberation? How can it be reduced?
15. What is loudness of sound? What factors does it depend on?
16. How is ultrasound used for cleaning?
17. Explain how defects in a metal block can be detected using
ultrasound.
Rationalised 2023-24
